---
title: Why AGI?
published: true
categories:
- agi
---

# Introduction
In a university philosophy course, I read a paper that first touched on the topic of humankind's last invention. At that time I was fascinated by the concept of an Artificial General Intelligence [AGI] that would self improve itself and do so at a near-exponential rate. I'd later learn this is called a "fast take off" and might _seem_ broadly beneficial to humanity prima facie. An optimist might first think that an AGI could readily improve our world say by curing cancer, ending wars, and other noncontroversial stances.

However upon closer inspection, I've come to hold the belief that safe AGI is not guaranteed. Therefore, I want to explicitly outline why I believe that AGI poses a unique threat in my own words. I'm writing this to be "by-and-large" true over precisely true.

# Beliefs & Arguments
1. **Orthongonality Thesis**: Goals and Intelligence are two different axises within an AGI. Therefore, the space of possibilities includes "Superintelligence, Misaligned with Human Goals."
2. An AGI being misaligned to human values seems more likely than to be aligned. This is because by-and-large the AGI will seek power (an instrumental goal) to accomplish its terminal goal.
3. Even if the above two are solved, it is still possible for an AGI to create a terrible outcome that results from the **value loading problem.** Using the example goal of "cure cancer" to an AGI: the AGI _could_ solve for this by giving everyone a pill where they die at the age of 40. The AGI found that cancer is much more common in old age and solved the goal given but is not aligned with human values.

# Current Background Knowledge
I do not consider myself anywhere near an expert and have thoughtfully engaged in learning about AGI Risk in the dozens (not yet hundreds) of hours. Professionally, I have seen first hand the power, the misunderstanding, & the misuse of narrow artificial intelligence tools.

##### AGI Risk Background
- [AGI Safety Fundamentals Program - Technical Alignment](https://www.eacambridge.org/technical-alignment-curriculum) as a Participant then a Facilitator (estimated reading time = 30 hours; 20 hours of discussion).
- *Superintelligence* by Nick Bostrom (estimated reading time = 10 hours).
- *Human Compatible* by Stuart J. Russell (reading now with an estimate of 5 hours).
- [Cold Takes Blog](https://cold-takes.com/) by Holden Karnofsky (estimated reading time on AGI = 4 hours).

##### AI Training
- Deployed half a dozen ML models at various companies (1000s of hours since 2017).
- Deep Learning Specialization (150 hours).
- Multiple meetups with hands on tutorials with deep learning, NLP, & computer vision (estimated 10-20 hours)
- Data Science Bootcamp (500 hours covering computer science and mathematics).
- University Courses (Econometrics; Statistics; Calculus 1 & 2).

# Where to go from here?
I'm optimistic humanity can solve the above introductory problems & the many other more nuanced problems I've discovered along the way. My [2015-self wrote](./Reaching-The-Summit) about self-driving cars & aligning my career toward this narrow AI direction. I moved closer toward narrow AI by [completing a data science bootcamp in 2017](./Bootcamp-And-Beyond). Connecting the dots along the way, my next career step or shortly thereafter (<5 years) will be to directly contribute to AGI Alignment. Given [my experience](./All-Jobs-to-Date) so far, it seems a Technical Manager has the highest degree of fit.
